README.md, before:

# Speech-Emotion-Recognition
In this project, we propose an emotion recognition system to model the Urdu
language using languages such as German, English and Italian. We want to see if we can
generalize across languages.  This project replicates the Paper "Cross Lingual Speech Emotion Recognition: Urdu vs. Western Languages (https://arxiv.org/pdf/1812.10411).

## Tabel of Contents
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Code](#code)
- [Results](#results)
- [Critic](#critic)
  
## Installation
#### 1. Clone the repository 
```bash
 git clone https://github.com/juverse/Speech-Emotion-Recognition.git
```
#### 2. Install dependencies:
To run this project, the following dependencies are required. It is recommended to create a conda environment to manage the dependencies.

Python 3.11.11
XGBoost: 2.1.1
scikit-learn: 1.6.1
pandas: 2.2.3
matplotlib: 3.10.0
NumPy: 1.26.4
SciPy: 1.15.2
imbalanced-learn: 0.13.0
shap: 0.46.0

## Code
#### Data Preprocessing
In this folder, we explore, prepare the data, and generate features.

#### Experiments
In this folder, we replicate the experiments from the original paper. In the file baseline_replication.ipynb, you will find the exact same procedure. However, as we made some improvements, we implemented a slightly different approach in baseline.ipynb.

#### Evaluation
In this folder, we evaluate the feature importances for the baseline model and the results of all experiments.

## Results

## Critic
The models were tested on a variety of languages, but many of the datasets are small and not representative of the broader linguistic diversity. This is especially true for Urdu, which is a relatively under-researched language in this context. Additionally, Urdu contains many English sequences, which may have influenced the performance of the models.
In this paper, we compared three European languages — German, English, and Italian — with Urdu. The original paper referred to these as "Western languages", although there are many more European and non-European languages that are affiliated with the "Western" hemisphere. However, it is important to clarify a few points.
Urdu is the national language of Pakistan and is spoken by millions of people. Therefore, it is not a "small language" in terms of the number of speakers. However, compared to languages like English, it has been less extensively researched in the field of computational linguistics. This lack of research and available datasets may have impacted the results of our study.
Additionally, it is worth noting that Urdu often includes English sequences, which could have influenced model performance. Given these factors, our findings should be interpreted with caution, and further studies with more comprehensive and balanced datasets are necessary.
Furthermore, all four languages are part of the historical indo-european language family. Although English and German are relatively closely related since both are western germanic languages, they are as far away from italic languages such as Italian as they are from indian languages such as Urdu.

## Comparison with Initial Project Plan
We closely followed our project proposal. In fact, we went beyond it by replicating all experiments from the original paper. Additionally, we included a dummy model, suggested an improvement to the baseline model, calculated feature importances and SHAP values, and carried out an additional comparison across languages.
Contrary to what we had originally announced, we ended up using all features, just like in the original paper. We manually tested a few hyperparameters but decided against using random or grid search, as we prioritized comparing all experiments with each other over hyperparameter optimization.
Overall, we gained valuable insights throughout the project, and we consider it a successful and rewarding experience.

Commit message:

finished Doku for multiling and percentage

README.md, after:

# Speech-Emotion-Recognition
In this project, we propose an emotion recognition system to model the Urdu
language using languages such as German, English and Italian. We want to see if we can
generalize across languages.  This project replicates the Paper "Cross Lingual Speech Emotion Recognition: Urdu vs. Western Languages (https://arxiv.org/pdf/1812.10411).

## Tabel of Contents
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Code](#code)
- [Results](#results)
- [Critic](#critic)
  
## Installation
#### 1. Clone the repository 
```bash
 git clone https://github.com/juverse/Speech-Emotion-Recognition.git
```
#### 2. Install dependencies:
To run this project, the following dependencies are required. It is recommended to create a conda environment to manage the dependencies.

Python 3.11.11
XGBoost: 2.1.1
scikit-learn: 1.6.1
pandas: 2.2.3
matplotlib: 3.10.0
NumPy: 1.26.4
SciPy: 1.15.2
imbalanced-learn: 0.13.0
shap: 0.46.0

## Code
#### Data Preprocessing
In this folder, we explore, prepare the data, and generate features.

#### Experiments
In this folder, we replicate the experiments from the original paper. In the file baseline_replication.ipynb, you will find the exact same procedure. However, as we made some improvements, we implemented a slightly different approach in baseline.ipynb.

#### Evaluation
In this folder, we evaluate the feature importances for the baseline model and the results of all experiments.

## Results

## Critic
The models were tested on a variety of languages, but many of the datasets are small and not representative of the broader linguistic diversity. This is especially true for Urdu, which is a relatively under-researched language in this context. In the description of the dataset 38 speakers are mentioned although only 29 speakers audio files are contained in the dataset. Additionally, Urdu contains many English sequences, which may have influenced the performance of the models. 
In this paper, the authors compared three European languages — German, English, and Italian — with Urdu. The original paper referred to these as "Western languages", although there are many more European and non-European languages that are affiliated with the "Western" hemisphere. However, it is important to clarify a few points.
Urdu is the national language of Pakistan and is spoken by millions of people. Therefore, it is not a "small language" in terms of the number of speakers. However, compared to languages like English, it has been less extensively researched in the field of computational linguistics. This lack of research and available datasets may have impacted the results of our study.
Additionally, it is worth noting that Urdu often includes English sequences, which could have influenced model performance. Given these factors, our findings should be interpreted with caution, and further studies with more comprehensive and balanced datasets are necessary.
Furthermore, all four languages are part of the historical indo-european language family. Although English and German are relatively closely related since both are western germanic languages, they are as far away from italic languages such as Italian as they are from indian languages such as Urdu.
Methodologically speaking, the study oftentimes didn't specify their approach in detail aggravating the replication (especially for the percentage adjustment setting). Moreover, the results and following interpretation by the authors turned out to be inconsistent with our replication attempt. 

## Comparison with Initial Project Plan
We closely followed our project proposal. In fact, we went beyond it by replicating all experiments from the original paper. Additionally, we included a dummy model, suggested an improvement to the baseline model, calculated feature importances and SHAP values, and carried out an additional comparison across languages.
Contrary to what we had originally announced, we ended up using all features, just like in the original paper. We manually tested a few hyperparameters but decided against using random or grid search, as we prioritized comparing all experiments with each other over hyperparameter optimization.
Overall, we gained valuable insights throughout the project, and we consider it a successful and rewarding experience.


## Outlook
As our project unfolded we came across many possible directions and further analyses that could be considered in a following project. First, looking at more detailed emotions instead of just valence might change the results significantly. Second, pointing out further specific underlying features as originally proposed in the project plan could lead to a deeper understanding of emotional expressions in speech. Third, gathering more datapoints for at least two languages would help to solidify our claims and make them generalizable. Therefore, we suggest to take a similar approach to Lattif et al. and use natural clips like YouTube videos that are already available and just need to be labeled.
